CIVICPULSE - COMPLETE PROJECT EXPLANATION
=========================================
Updated: 6 October 2026

1. THE PROJECT IN ONE MINUTE
----------------------------
CivicPulse is a web application for reporting and managing city problems in
Bengaluru. A citizen can describe a pothole, waste pile, waterlogging, broken
streetlight, traffic problem, or another public issue. The app suggests the
issue type, checks whether nearby people have already reported the same
problem, gives the case a priority score, and shows its progress on a map.

The authority workspace shows a ranked list of cases. A team can choose a
department, update the status, and add a public progress note. The citizen can
track the same case. To mark a case resolved, the demo requires an after-photo
from the authority and a confirmation photo from a citizen.

The current application is a working hackathon MVP (minimum viable product),
not a live government service. Its starting cases and statistics are example
data. It does not submit complaints to a government system.

One-sentence pitch:
"CivicPulse turns many reports about a city problem into one clear case, helps
teams decide what needs attention first, and lets citizens see the progress."


2. THE PROBLEM AND OUR IDEA
---------------------------
People often report the same problem separately. If six people report one
pothole, a team may see six tickets rather than one problem supported by six
reports. Important safety issues can get mixed with less urgent work. Citizens
may not know which office to contact or whether a problem was actually fixed.

CivicPulse addresses this with four simple ideas:

* One problem should have one main case, even when many citizens report it.
* Priority should have a visible explanation, not just a hidden number.
* Each case should show a likely responsible public office and a contact path.
* Progress and proof of a fix should be visible to citizens.

The project is meant to support human decisions. A suggested category,
priority, or office still needs review by the appropriate civic team.


3. WHO USES IT
--------------
Citizen:
* Reports an issue using text, an optional photo, and a location.
* Sees whether the report joins an existing case.
* Gets a case reference and a separate receipt for that particular report.
* Follows the case status and public updates.
* Can say "I'm affected too" once per browser for an open case.
* Can upload a current photo to confirm that a problem was fixed.

Authority user (simulated in this demo):
* Sees the city map, ranked cases, counts, trends, and hotspots.
* Filters the issue list and exports visible cases to CSV.
* Opens a case, chooses a department, changes its status, and adds notes.
* Uploads an after-photo when requesting resolution.

There are no real authority accounts yet. Anyone who opens the authority view
can use its controls in this local demo. "Internal notes" are a demo feature,
not secure private records.


4. WHAT THE MVP INCLUDES
------------------------
The essential MVP is one complete journey:

1) A citizen describes and locates a problem.
2) The app classifies the description with local AI when available.
3) The app checks for a nearby existing case and calculates priority.
4) The citizen registers the report.
5) The case appears in the shared map and authority queue.
6) The authority updates the case.
7) The citizen tracks the update.
8) Both sides provide after-photos before the case is shown as resolved.

This complete journey is implemented. The 3D map, city tour, charts, CSV
download, bilingual interface, and visual design help demonstrate and explore
the MVP. They are useful features, but the reporting-to-resolution journey is
the core product.


5. HOW A REPORT WORKS, STEP BY STEP
----------------------------------
Step 1 - Describe the issue.
The citizen enters at least 12 characters of text. They can attach a JPG, PNG,
or WebP photo, or use the example pothole scenario. Voice input is available
only if the browser supports speech recognition. The photo is optional for a
new report. The app resizes uploaded images before saving them in the browser.

Step 2 - Choose the location.
The citizen can select a Bengaluru neighbourhood, allow browser location
access, click or drag the map pin, or type coordinates and a nearby landmark.
The app checks that the location values are valid. GPS is optional.

Step 3 - Analyse the description.
The browser sends the description to CivicPulse's /api/analyze server route.
That route tries a locally running Ollama model. It returns a category, a
short summary, and a confidence estimate. If Ollama is unavailable, an
optional configured external provider can be tried. If that is also absent or
fails, fixed keyword rules keep reporting usable. The analysis screen tells
the user which source was used. The model does not inspect image pixels.

Step 4 - Check for an existing case.
The app compares the new report with open cases. A candidate must have the
same category, be within 250 metres, have enough shared words in the
description, and have been created within the last 30 days. A resolved case is
not matched. If a suitable case exists, the citizen sees it before submitting.

Step 5 - Give the issue a priority.
CivicPulse calculates a score from 0 to 100 using visible rules. It considers
the type of issue, safety words, words such as school or hospital, how many
people reported or confirmed it, how long it has been open, and whether a
newly reported case has waited over 48 hours. The factors are shown on the
case page so a person can understand the score.

Step 6 - Route and register.
The category suggests an internal department, such as Roads & Infrastructure,
Water Supply, or Traffic Management. The user presses Register complaint (or
Add my report to this case). A new issue gets a case reference. Every submitted
report also gets its own receipt, beginning with CR-. If it matches an existing
issue, its report is attached to that case instead of opening another case.

Step 7 - Review and track.
The case appears in the city map, authority issue list, and tracker. The
tracker accepts the short case number (for example, 892), the full reference,
or a report receipt. The case page shows its status, timeline, location,
linked reports, likely responsible office, and public contact options.

Step 8 - Respond and resolve.
The authority view can change the department and status, and publish a note.
Status values are Reported, Assigned, In Progress, and Resolved. A request to
resolve a case must include a newly uploaded authority after-photo. A citizen
must also upload a current confirmation photo. These can arrive in either
order. The case reaches Resolved only when both are present. If only one photo
has arrived, the case remains open. A resolved case can later be reopened.


6. CASES, REPORTS, AND REFERENCES
--------------------------------
A "case" is the main record for one problem at one place. A "report" is one
citizen's submission. Several reports can point to the same case. For example,
if one pothole already has six reports and another person reports it, the case
count stays the same while its report count becomes seven.

The interface displays easy labels such as "Pothole in Koramangala - Case
892". Older internal references such as CP-2026-0892 still work in links.
New cases use CASE- references internally. A CR- receipt identifies one
particular citizen report, even when it was joined to an older case.

The starting demo has 48 example cases, including two clearly labelled
resolved examples. A browser with earlier saved demo data or new reports may
show a different total. Reset demo restores the standard example state.


7. WHERE AI IS USED, AND WHERE IT IS NOT
---------------------------------------
AI is integrated in report-text classification. By default, the Next.js server
calls Ollama at http://127.0.0.1:11434 using llama3.2:latest. The browser
does not call Ollama directly. The model is asked to return one of the app's
allowed issue categories, a short summary, and a confidence estimate. The
server validates the response before using it.

The app supports these 12 categories:
Pothole; Road Damage; Garbage / Waste; Water Leakage; Waterlogging;
Drainage / Sewage; Broken Streetlight; Fallen Tree; Traffic Signal;
Traffic / Congestion; Public Property Damage; Other.

If Ollama is stopped, slow, or gives an invalid answer, the app falls back to
keyword matching. An optional external analysis provider can be configured
between Ollama and the keyword fallback. The case page labels the source as
Ollama, provider, or local keyword rules. A displayed confidence value is an
estimate; it is not a measured guarantee of correctness.

Priority scoring, duplicate detection, and department routing are transparent
programmed rules. They are not claims that AI understood the whole street
scene. Uploaded report photos are for human review; the current AI does not
identify issues from photos.

The default pictures for issue categories are generated illustrations. They
are labelled as illustrations, not evidence from a real site. The two
pre-resolved sample cases also show clearly labelled fictional after-images.
For a newly reported case, real uploaded photos are displayed separately.


8. HOW PRIORITY AND DUPLICATE DETECTION WORK
--------------------------------------------
Priority score (0 to 100):
* Base risk depends on category. For example, a traffic signal starts higher
  than damage to a bench.
* Words suggesting danger or blocked access add 18 points.
* School, hospital, and busy-junction wording adds 12 points.
* Report volume and community confirmations add at most 15 points.
* Time unresolved adds at most 10 points.
* A case still at Reported after 48 hours adds 5 points.
* The final total cannot exceed 100.

The display bands are Low (0-29), Medium (30-54), High (55-79), and Critical
(80-100). The score is a demo aid for sorting work. It is not a government
severity rating. Actual danger must be assessed by people on the ground.

Duplicate detection checks category, distance, age, and overlapping words.
Distance is calculated from coordinates, so the method is more precise when
the location is accurate. Word matching currently works best for English
descriptions. A production version should support better multilingual
matching, a human review queue, and a way to separate cases that were merged
incorrectly.


9. MAIN SCREENS AND FEATURES
----------------------------
Home (/): Short introduction and an entry point to reporting or the city
workspace. Its numbers come from the browser's current case data.

Citizen workspace (/citizen): A city overview with active cases, critical
cases, citizen reports, and resolved cases. It also shows a map and a ranked
list. The city tour moves across selected priority cases. The hotspot view
shows report density.

Report issue (/report): Four stages - issue, location, analysis, and
registered. It supports a photo, location selection, an AI or fallback
analysis result, duplicate preview, and a final tracking reference.

City map (/map): A map plus a case list. Users can search or filter by
category, severity, and status, and switch between markers and a heatmap.
The 3D map uses MapLibre; a 2D compatibility map is available when needed.

Tracker (/track): Search for a case number, full reference, or report receipt.
The detail page shows its timeline, analysis factors, linked reports, contact
information, location, photos, and resolution evidence.

Authority dashboard (/authority): The same underlying cases viewed as a
work queue. It shows priority signals, department workload, maps, and trends.

Authority issue list (/authority/issues): Search, filter, sort, open a case,
and export the visible list to CSV.

Authority case page (/authority/issues/[id]): Change the department or status,
add a public update and demo internal note, and upload an authority photo to
request resolution.

Language selection: The header can switch interface text between English and
Kannada. The choice remains across pages and reloads. Case IDs, coordinates,
official names, place names, and citizen-entered text are not translated.

Other practical features: Responsive desktop and mobile layouts, photo
preview, optional voice input, browser location, cross-tab updates, error and
empty states, and a reset control for presentations.


10. WHO IS RESPONSIBLE FOR AN ISSUE?
------------------------------------
The case page has a "Responsible public office" section. It suggests the
likely agency and team based on the issue type. For example:

* Potholes, waste, streetlights, fallen trees, and waterlogging suggest the
  Greater Bengaluru Authority or the local city corporation.
* Water supply leaks and many sewerage problems suggest BWSSB.
* Traffic signals and congestion suggest Bengaluru Traffic Police.

The section offers configured public phone numbers and links to official
complaint sites or directories. The demo includes GBA's public grievance
helpline 1533 and BWSSB's 1916. For traffic cases with a recognised area
name, it suggests a traffic police station and its listed phone number.

This is guidance on whom to contact. It does not identify a named officer,
confirm exact jurisdiction, or file a complaint with that office. The agency
must confirm who owns the specific road, drain, signal, or asset. Contact
details should be checked again before any real deployment.


11. ONLINE POSTS AND APPROXIMATE LOCATIONS
------------------------------------------
The current app does not automatically collect posts from Reddit, Instagram,
or other social platforms. The earlier manual online-lead form was removed.
An old /authority/online-leads bookmark now redirects to the issue list.
Previously saved example leads can still appear in browser data; they are
labelled unverified, and an area-based point is marked as approximate.

Automatic collection is a possible future feature, but it needs permitted
platform access, careful handling of personal data, and human review. An area
name in a post is not an exact GPS location. Such a post should be treated as
a lead for verification, not an official citizen report or a dispatch-ready
location.


12. TECHNICAL WORKING IN SIMPLE WORDS
-------------------------------------
The site is built with Next.js, React, and TypeScript. Next.js serves the web
pages and the /api/analyze route. React keeps the screens updated when case
data changes. MapLibre displays the city map; Leaflet helps with location
picking and the 2D map. Recharts draws dashboard charts.

Main data items:
* Issue: the main case, including category, location, status, priority,
  department, evidence, and counts.
* Citizen report: one submitted description, optional photo, and receipt.
* History: dated public status events for a case.
* Note: a team note in the demo authority view.
* Confirmation: a record that this browser has used "I'm affected too".

The app begins with example cases. Changes are saved in this browser's local
storage. Opening another tab at the same site in the same browser can see
updates. Another device or browser does not share those changes. If site data
is cleared or Reset demo is used, those local changes are lost. Large photos
can fill browser storage, although the uploader resizes them first. Saved
duplicate case IDs are repaired when data loads so case lists remain unique.

Simple data flow:
Citizen -> report form -> analysis API -> category and summary
        -> duplicate check + priority rules + department suggestion
        -> saved case/report -> map + tracker + authority workspace
        -> authority update + citizen confirmation -> resolved case

Useful source-code locations for a technical explanation:
* app/api/analyze/route.ts - Ollama request and fallbacks.
* services/issueClassifier.ts - keyword analysis and browser API call.
* lib/priority.ts - priority score.
* lib/duplicateDetection.ts - nearby-case matching.
* lib/departmentRouting.ts and lib/responsibility.ts - routing and contacts.
* services/issueRepository.ts - report, status, resolution, and saved data.
* components/CivicProvider.tsx - shared browser state.
* components/ReportFlow.tsx and components/IssueDetail.tsx - main journeys.


13. HOW TO RUN AND DEMONSTRATE IT
--------------------------------
Requirements: Node.js 22 or newer, npm, and a modern web browser.

In the project folder:
  npm install
  npm run dev

Then open http://127.0.0.1:3000.

For the local AI path, run Ollama on its default port and install the model:
  ollama pull llama3.2
  ollama serve

The configured default model name is llama3.2:latest. If Ollama is already
running, it is not necessary to start another server. The app still works
without it through keyword fallback. .env.example shows the optional model,
local URL, and external-provider settings.

Useful project checks:
  npm run typecheck
  npm run lint
  npm test
  npm run test:e2e       (needs the local site and Chrome)
  npm run build

A short live presentation:
1) Explain the problem: repeated complaints hide the real number of problems.
2) Open the authority workspace and show its ranked cases and map.
3) Open Report an issue and choose Use demo scenario.
4) Select Koramangala 5th Block and analyse the school-zone pothole.
5) Show its suggested category, priority, department, and nearby existing case.
6) Add the report. Explain that one case now has an extra citizen report.
7) Track that case, then open the authority view and publish a status update.
8) Return to the tracker to show the same update.
9) Explain the two-photo resolution rule and show a clearly labelled resolved
   sample case if you do not want to upload photos during the presentation.

Use Reset demo before a repeat presentation. It restores the original example
cases and removes changes made in this browser's demo data.


14. WHAT IS REAL, WHAT IS DEMO, AND WHAT COMES NEXT
--------------------------------------------------
Working now: The end-to-end local workflow, text classification with Ollama
when it is available, keyword fallback, priority scoring, nearby-case
matching, maps, public contact suggestions, bilingual interface selection,
tracking, status updates, photo-based resolution, CSV export, and browser
persistence.

Demo boundaries: Starting cases and statistics are illustrative. Some photos
are generated illustrations. Authority access is simulated. Data lives only
in this browser. There is no government integration, production database,
verified user identity, SMS/email delivery, automatic social-post collection,
or AI photo recognition. The app cannot prove that a photo was taken at the
reported location. Two tabs editing at the same time can overwrite each
other's changes.

Pilot steps: Add verified citizen and staff accounts; store data in a shared
database with safe simultaneous updates; validate exact wards and public
contacts; build official agency handoffs; add photo and location verification;
measure classification and duplicate-matching accuracy; support more
languages in report understanding; add notifications; and run a real
accessibility and security review. Social-platform monitoring should only be
considered with approved API access and a review process.


15. EXPECTED QUESTIONS AND SIMPLE ANSWERS
-----------------------------------------
Q1. What is the main purpose of CivicPulse?
A. It helps people report a city problem and helps teams see which problems
   need attention. It combines repeat reports and shows progress to citizens.

Q2. What is an MVP?
A. It is the smallest working version that proves the main idea. Here, a
   citizen can report, the app analyses and registers the case, an authority
   can update it, and the citizen can track it through resolution.

Q3. Is this a real government complaint portal?
A. No. It is a local demonstration. It suggests public offices and provides
   contact links, but it does not file cases in government systems.

Q4. Where exactly is AI integrated?
A. The /api/analyze server route sends the report description to local
   Ollama. The model suggests a category and short summary. Other important
   decisions, such as priority and duplicate detection, use visible rules.

Q5. What happens if Ollama is not running?
A. The report still works. The app can use an optional configured provider,
   then its own keyword classifier. The screen labels the analysis source.

Q6. Does AI analyse the uploaded photo?
A. No. The text is analysed. Photos are shown as supporting evidence for
   people to inspect.

Q7. Why not let AI decide which issue is most urgent?
A. The demo uses a clear score so users can see the reasons. Real urgency
   still needs field assessment, and a pilot should test any scoring method.

Q8. How is the priority score calculated?
A. It starts with category risk, then adds points for safety words, sensitive
   places, community volume, age, and response delay. It is capped at 100.

Q9. Can many confirmations artificially raise priority?
A. Their contribution is capped. The demo also allows one confirmation per
   browser. Production needs accounts, rate limits, and abuse checks.

Q10. How do you find duplicate reports?
A. The app looks for an open case with the same category, within 250 metres,
   from the last 30 days, with overlapping description words.

Q11. What if two different issues are merged incorrectly?
A. That is a known risk. A production version needs staff review and an
   option to separate incorrectly joined reports.

Q12. Why does a person receive both a case number and a report receipt?
A. A case is the shared problem. A receipt identifies one person's report.
   Several receipts can belong to the same case.

Q13. Who is responsible for a case?
A. The app suggests a department and likely public agency based on category.
   The case page includes public phone and website details where configured.
   The agency must confirm exact jurisdiction and asset ownership.

Q14. Can the app show a traffic police station number?
A. Yes, for several known Bengaluru area names it suggests a listed local
   traffic station and phone number. The exact junction's jurisdiction still
   needs confirmation.

Q15. Why do both authority and citizen upload a resolution photo?
A. The two photos give a clearer public record of the claimed fix. In this
   demo they are required before the status becomes Resolved, but identity
   and photo authenticity are not verified yet.

Q16. Are the resolved sample photos real?
A. No. They are generated demo examples and are labelled as fictional. New
   uploads from a user are displayed separately as submitted evidence.

Q17. Does Kannada selection translate citizen reports?
A. No. It changes interface wording. Names, numbers, locations, and text
   entered by people remain as they were.

Q18. Can you collect issues automatically from Reddit or Instagram?
A. Not in the current version. That would need approved platform access,
   privacy handling, and human checking. The old manual lead form was removed.

Q19. What if a social post only says "near Silk Board"?
A. That is only an approximate area. It should be marked as unverified and
   checked on the ground before treating it as an exact case location.

Q20. Where is the data stored?
A. In this browser's local storage. It survives reloads here, but does not
   automatically appear on another device. A pilot needs a shared database.

Q21. Why is there no login for authority users?
A. This is a hackathon demo. Real authority access must have verified staff
   accounts and permissions before public use.

Q22. What is the main benefit for a city team?
A. A team sees one ranked queue, repeated complaints linked together, a map
   of problem locations, and a visible history of actions and evidence.

Q23. How would you measure success in a pilot?
A. Measure time from report to triage, duplicate reduction, time to repair,
   number of reopened cases, and citizen confirmation of fixes. Compare these
   with the current process rather than claiming impact from demo data.

Q24. What are the most important next improvements?
A. Shared database storage, real authentication, official agency workflow,
   tested AI accuracy, safer duplicate review, better location checks, and
   notifications.


16. SHORT GLOSSARY
------------------
Case: The main record for one city problem.
Report: One person's description of that problem.
Report receipt: The reference for that individual submission.
Priority score: A 0-100 demo number used to sort cases, with visible factors.
Duplicate: A new report that belongs to an existing case.
Routing: Suggesting which department should handle a case.
Hotspot: An area with a concentration of mapped cases or reports.
After-photo: A photo submitted after repair work is claimed to be complete.
Ollama: Software that runs an AI language model on the local computer.
Fallback: A simpler method used when the preferred method is unavailable.
MVP: Minimum viable product, the first complete working version of an idea.

END OF PROJECT EXPLANATION
